In this article, we will be exploring the extremely prevalent database engine called PostgreSQL (postgres for short) .
We will describe what it does, it's main uses and then explain how to set it up and use it on you rcomputer.

What is Postgres?

Let's go to the source and get a good definition of Postgres!
According do the website Postgress is "a powerful open source object-relational database system with over 
30 years of active development that has earned it a strong reputation for reliability, feature robustness and performace."

Like other relational databases, you can model almost any data and its relationships using tables, keys, constraints, triggers and more!

Postgres is currently used in production by many modern technology companies 
be it small startups or large organizations such as Apple, Instagram, Twitch and Reddit.

Postgres itself is a database "server". 
There are several ways to connect to Postgres via "clients",  including GUIs, CLIs and programming languages often via ORMs.
In order to run and use Postgres on your own computer, you will need to set up both a Postgres server and a client.



                   -----------------| GUI Client (eg Postbird, PgAdmin4, Postico, etc) 
                 /
|---------------|
|               |
|               |
|POSTGRES SERVER|--------------------| CLI client (eg psql)
|               |
|---------------|
                \
                   -----------------| Programming Language Client (eg ORM)

In the rest of this article we'l get a Postgres server and GUI client set up locally.

SETTING UP POSTGRES (server)

These instructions will be different depending on your operating system
(omitting windows and linux)

There are several ways to download and manage Postgres installation on Mac OSX as described on the site.

We recommend Postgress.app as it's th easiest way to get started.
According to the Postgres website, Postgres.app is a native OSX app that runs in the menu bar without the need of an installer.
Open the app, and you have the PostgreSQL server ready and awaiting new connections.
Close the app, and the server shuts down.

Follow the instructions on their home page to get started.

The first time you open up Postgres.app you may need to confirm that the app is not malicious.

Once you open Postgres.app and initialize the server, you should see some initial databases.

SETTING UP Postgres (client)

Now that postgres is running locally, we can connect it via a "client" - 
a graphical or command line interface that enables us to connect to the Postgres server, write and execute SQL commands as input and see the resulting output.

GUI
 Our preference for a cross-platform software to visually interact with Postgres is Postbird.
 It is open-source, simple and easy to use and a great option for beginner and advanced users!
 A strong runner up is PgAdmin, one of the most popular and feature rich open source admin dev platforms for Postgres.
 We'll walk you through how to install and use Postbird on different OSs.

 (omitting Windows and Linux)

Mac OS X
Download the application from the Postbird website.
Open the .dmg file to install and copy the application into your Applications folder.
Go to your Applications folder and open Postbird. You may see a Security prompt that warns “Postbird is an app downloaded from the Internet. 
Are you sure you want to open it?” Click “Open” to proceed. 
Alternatively, you may need to right-click on the application and then click “Open” the first time you open the application.
From there you can now use Postbird to start writing SQL queries. 
You can select the database you want to work in using the dropdown menu in the top left corner, 
you can add tables to that database using the plus sign in the bottom left corner, 
and you can use the query tab to write SQL queries to manipulate and investigate tables that you create!

Command Line
We’ll primarily be using Postbird as our client for connecting to Postgres, 
but you can also connect using the command line tool psql! psql is the standard interactive CLI used by both hobbyists and professionals.

According to the Postgres documentation, psql “enables you to type in queries interactively, issue them to PostgreSQL, and see the query results. 
Alternatively, input can be from a file. 
In addition, it provides a number of meta-commands and various shell-like features to facilitate writing scripts and automating a wide variety of tasks.”

When using psql, you can use the \q command to quit out of psql and return to your normal terminal.

Mac OS X
From Postgres.app, simply click on any database you’d like to connect to. 
That's It will automatically open up Terminal or iTerm (depending on your setting in Preferences) with psql CLI running.

From here, you can run a test query:

psql (12.3)
Type "help" for help.

postgres=# select * from films;
 id |    name    | release_date
----+------------+--------------
  1 | The Matrix | 1999-03-31
(1 row)
